First class module (Learning/Language/Module System) (#2090)
ocaml/ocaml.org: data/tutorials/language/1ms_03_first_class_modules.md

---
id: first-class-modules
title: First-Class Modules
description: >
  First-Class Modules permits the use of modules as if they are usual values.
category: "Module System"
---
## Introduction

This tutorial details how to use first-class modules in a program. This
can dispense the user of a library to use functors in order to create some
modules.

> We will use in this tutorial a dummy database driver implementation with functors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use a dummy database driver implementation with functors and first-class modules in this tutorial.
```

> and first-class modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

**Prerequisites**: [Modules](/docs/modules), [Functors](/doc/functors).

## An Example With Functors

> Let's suppose we want to have a program which can be used with multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's suppose we want to have a program that can be used with multiple
```

> databases, each database has a specific set of parameters (host, credentials,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
databases. Each database has a specific set of parameters (host, credentials,
```

> database name...), and a set of functions (prepare query, execute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
database name...) and a set of functions (prepare query, execute
```

query...) which can be implemented differently.

One implementation would be to define a generic module signature and
provide specific modules, one for each database type. The program can be
presented like this:

```ocaml
(* Database library *)

module type Database = sig
  val execute : string -> string list
end

module type Postgres_Connection = sig
  val hostname : string
  val database_name : string
end

module Postgres(Cnx : Postgres_Connection) : Database = struct
  let execute query =
    Printf.printf "[%s@%s] exec %s\n"
      Cnx.database_name Cnx.hostname query;
    [ "A dummy result" ]
end

(* Main program *)

module My_Database =
  Postgres(struct
    let hostname = "localhost"
    let database_name = "dummy"
  end)

let () =
  ignore @@ My_Database.execute "SELECT * FROM table"
```

> Here, we would just have to change the `My_Database` definition if we want

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we would just have to change the `My_Database` definition 
```

to use a database from an other type.

We can also define multiple `My_Database` modules if we want our program

> to work simultaneously with multiple databases which may have different drivers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to work simultaneously with multiple databases that may have different drivers.
```

## First-Class Modules

> In the previous example, we have seen that we can have a modular program

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous example, we saw that we could have a modular program
```

> where changing a database would just need a change of a couple lines. However,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where changing a database would just need a couple lines changed. However,
```

the `My_Database` module is only visible from the module where it is declared.

> Defining a generic `transaction` function which would send `start`, `commit`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Defining a generic `transaction` function that would send `start`, `commit`,
```

> and/or `rollback` would also need to access this module. This can't be always practicle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and/or `rollback` would also need to access this module. This can't always be practical.
```

First-class modules can make it possible to call this `transaction` function
with a module as a parameter. The idea is

> to pass a module as if it was an argument of usual type... and convert back

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to pass a module as if it was an argument of usual type, then convert 
```

> the argument to a module if we want to use its exported values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the argument back to a module if we want to use its exported values.
```

We have the following expressions:

```ocaml
let variable = (module M:ModuleType) in ...
let module M = (val argument:ModuleType) in ...
```

The first expression converts a module into
a variable of type `(module ModuleType)`. (We can replace `M` with a `struct ... end`
definition or a functor call).

> The second expression converts back such a value into a module `M` which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second expression converts back such a value into a module `M`, which
```

can be used in the expression (expression of the form `M.function`).

If a function just needs to get a first-class module and uses its exported values,
we can just declare this function in the following way:

```ocaml
let f (module M:ModuleType) =
  ...
```

Then the conversion is implicit and the body of the function can use
the module `M`.

The following program illustrates the use of first-class modules:

```ocaml
(* Database library *)

module type Database = sig
  val execute : string -> string list
end

let postgress_connect _hostname _database_name =
  (module struct
    let hostname = _hostname
    let database_name = _database_name
    let execute query =
       Printf.printf "[%s@%s] exec %s\n" database_name hostname query;
       ["Dummy result"]
  end:Database)

let execute (module D:Database) query =
  D.execute query

(* Main program *)

let () =
  let database = postgress_connect "localhost" "dummy" in
  ignore @@ execute database "SELECT * FROM table_a"
```

The program is a little simpler since we don't have to define a dedicated

> module which contains database connection informations and the programmer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
module that contains database connection information, and the programmer
```

> who has to use the database library can even use it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
who has to use the database library can  use it
```

without having to call functors directly. The database variable can be used
as if it had a usual type and passed to any function that needs to use the database.

Note, we can also define `execute` in the following way:

```ocaml
let execute database query =
  let module D = (val database:Database) in
  D.execute query
```

Here, the `database` argument can be used if we have to call other functions

> which need it as a first-class module argument (let's say a commit/rollback

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that need it as a first-class module argument (let's say a commit/rollback
```

function).

> We have seen that OCaml modules can be seen as usual values. The database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember, OCaml modules can be seen as usual values. The database
```

example shows a use with a function argument, but we can also consider a list
of modules (ex: modules that represent drawable forms).

## Comparison to Object Programming

> First class modules can be compared with object instances from the object-programming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First-class modules can be compared with object instances from the object-programming
```

paradigm. It has in common:

> - encapsulation: the internal variables of the `Postgress` module are not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Encapsulation: the internal variables of the `Postgress` module are not
```

  accessible,

> - polymorphism: the `execute` function can be used with different types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Polymorphism: the `execute` function can be used with different types
```

  of databases and will behave differently.

> However, the first-class module we have implemented lack inheritence. It may be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the first-class module we have implemented lacks inheritence. It may be
```

> compared to a Java class which implements a single interface. The `include`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compared to a Java class that implements a single interface. The `include`
```
